High in this video we're going to talk about default values and in particular we're going to talk about
an issue that can come up.
So first let's see what happens at the wrong time when a module is loaded.
So when a module is loaded now can happen in different ways maybe you're importing the model from another
model at that point.
The module is being loaded.
If it's the first time you're importing it or maybe it's your main module that you're calling from the
command line right or whatever the case may be there's different ways modules can be loaded.
But when they do all the code in the module is executed right away.
And what do I mean by code being executed well you have things like for example a equals 10.
That's pretty obvious right.
We're executing a equals 10 we're essentially creating the object the integer object 10.
And then we're assigning a to that object.
Right we're letting a reference object.
But when you have this type of code here.
Def phunk A.
And then some code inside.
Well that actually is also being executed.
Now that's not the function being executed what's being executed here is death which is something that
creates the function.
So it's going to create the function is going to put it in memory.
Right.
And then phunk you can think of is simply just a variable name that happens to point to that function
object in memory.
So this actually is being executed not in the way that happens when we call func a that is executing
the function.
This line which is still being run it's being executed as code but it's not running the function.
It's just defining the function.
And so by the time we reach fonk a the function has been defined and every time we call func a it's
going to look at that particular object that func is pointing to and execute that function.
So what about default values.
Well let's look at.
Well let's look at that again.
So we have def phunk equals 10.
So now we have a default value.
Right.
We've got a single positional parameter that has a default value of 10.
Now def is going to run.
It's going to be executed.
It's going to create the function just as before and func is going to be essentially the variable name
of the function going to be the name that references that object.
But also what happens is that the default value is being evaluated and created as an object and the
default for a is then referencing that object in memory.
So that object when once def has run this object 10 now exists right.
It is an object and the default for a points to that object.
Again the function itself actually is not run.
It's just being defined it's being created.
Now when we call phunk what happens while now we execute the function but the function is this object
that's been already created in memory and amongst other things is that the default has already been
created.
It's not being recreated or re-evaluated every time we call the function.
Right.
That determination and that evaluation and creation of the default value is done once when def runs
not when funkiest called.
So Bob here is saying also what big deal you know.
Well it is a big deal in certain circumstances because consider this.
Let's say that we want to create a function that's going to log a message to the console.
What we want to provide a keyword only argument that's going to be optional for the date and time.
So the caller can specify the message and the date and time at which they want to essentially tag that
message.
But we want it to be optional.
So if they don't find the date and time then we want the function to fill in the current date and time.
So we might try something like this.
First we're going to import day time from the day time audio that will allow us now to set the default
for the team.
Right so we have a log function with a message and a DTA keyword only arguments since we've got the
style there that is going to have a default value of.
Now right of date time dupped UTC.
Now the current UTC date and time and then we'll print the message but we'll print the date followed
by the message.
So if the user provides a date that will get printed here.
If they don't we'll grab the current time and print that up.
That's what we're trying to achieve.
But let's see what happens in reality if we call laga message one at some point in time we'll get some
time stamp and I'll message right.
This just happens to be the time at which I ran this code.
For example and let's say that you know the module takes a little while to run.
Or maybe there's something else happens there's a pause or whatever the case is but let's say that sometime
later.
Right.
Maybe a few minutes later or a few seconds later we call this log function again.
So we called log message to and here's the output we get.
Now you'll notice that the date and time is identical down to the you know dot the M.E. and micro-seconds
it's identical.
And that's obviously not what we want.
So what's going on.
Why is this identical Why is UTC now the same it can't be.
We've had elapsed time between the two.
Well the reason for that remember is this date time that UTC now is an object that gets created and
put into memory and is thus assigned as the default for.
But it is done when def runs not when the function is called.
Which means that ditty stays the same.
It stays that same object.
Right.
And so that's why it doesn't matter how many times you call the log function the date and time will
remain the same.
Obviously that's all we want right.
We want the date and time to reflect the current date and time at the time when the log function was
called.
Now there might be cases when you want this to be the case.
Right.
But that's different.
That's not what we're trying to do here.
So here's a solution and this is kind of a pattern that you can use for any kind of problem like that.
We're not going to set D.T. to that defaulted time.
Right.
Instead we're going to set it to none.
And when we set to none we can then test inside the function to see if it's still none.
By setting it to none by saying D equals none in the parameters we're essentially still making it an
optional argument because it has a default value of the default value just happens to be this none object.
So if the user passes a value for d t it will not be numb anymore.
If they don't it will be none and it will know that while the user didn't pass a value in so now inside
the function we can test to see if the user actually passed that argument in or not.
And if they didn't then we can set it to the current date and time.
But we do that inside the function because that gets run every time the function is called.
So we might do something like this.
So we'll def log message.
We'll put the star in again and now we have our key word only argument D.T. and we said it's default
to none.
And inside the function we're going to test if DTC is now I'm using this or boolean operator recall
from the previous lectures that when we have a or b if a is truthy it will return a.
Otherwise it returns B while well is DTN to be truthy.
If it has a value.
In other words if the user specified a value.
So if they did we'll just use the value.
Otherwise we'll go ahead and grab the current UTC date and time.
So this line of code is equivalent to just writing it this way if not the.
In other words if D.T. is falsie then said DTA equal to the current date and time and then we can just
print out DTN message.
So this will fix the problem.
This will do exactly what we want to do.
Now in general always beware of using mutable objects or call bills for defaults on your parameters.
Just be careful with that because you can run into issues.
So just think about it if you're going to make a call to let's say a list right or you're going to make
deals equal to a function call.
Be careful.
Realize that it's not going to get cold again.
So if it's a function that is supposed to change over time that won't happen.
On the other hand if you said equal to some other list let's say you have you know a list that's assigned
a variable name somewhere.
And you said quote to my list.
Well be careful because now you might think oh it's never going to change because death only runs once.
Well that's true.
But now the default is pointing to an object that's mutable in memory which means it can change.
Potentially it can change.
And so now it's no longer constant drive it's no longer going to be just this one time thing that never
changes.
So it works both ways.
You can have problems either way.
So just be careful with that.
Be aware of those kinds of problems.
All right.
So let's switch to some code and let's just try all this out and see how it works.
So let's first start by importing data time from the day time from date time import date time.
And we are now going to call date time darte UTC.
Now I just want to show you what that does that basically just returns the current date and time.
And if you want to see it printed nicely.
So this is an object right but it also has a string representation.
There we go.
That's the string representation.
Now I can execute this a number of times and you'll notice that it changes right.
It's time is moving along.
So here we have 0 5 or 6 48 52 etc..
Ok so time is moving along now let's go ahead and try and write this log function that we talked about.
So here's the first approach we might take.
So we're going to ask the user for a positional parameter which is going to be the message.
And then we want an optional date and time.
And if they don't specify the date and time we want to take the current date and time so we'll set up
to date time darte UTC now and then we're just going to print out the date and time and then the message.
So we'll do that and we'll print the date time first and then the message.
OK.
So those are function.
So we can call log and we can pass in a message let's call it Message 1 and I'll pass in an actual date
and time.
So now I have to pass it as a keyword only argument and maybe I'll say it's two thousand and 1 0 1 0
1 0 0 0 0 0 0 dot or whatever it some day.
And so when we run that we get there not going to change the date to something else.
Maybe I'll make that 2000 and turn and we get that as well.
So all that works perfectly fine.
Now let's go ahead and not specify the date and time and let's see what happens.
Sort of pull this message too.
And so we get the current date and time which happens to be the current date and time.
As you can see it's close to the ones we were getting here.
OK.
So I'm talking just to wait a little bit and now I'm going to log another message.
It's called message 3.
And as you can see no time has elapsed right the date and time is still the same.
And it doesn't matter how many times I call this it will still remain the same.
Right.
And the reason for that is as we discussed in the lecture is that this date time of UTC now is evaluated
when death is run.
At this point here the function wasn't executed the function was created and the default value was also
created at that time.
So it will never change throughout the lifetime of this.
Now if I rerun some half hour reload the module or I'm able to rerun the definition of the lung function
and I can do this by hitting shift enter here or just rerun it and you can see that my in numbers change
to 14.
It used to be 7 or 8 on remember.
But now of course if I run this long message.
Now I've got a different date and time.
But if I run it again I now have the same one that keeps coming back.
OK.
So hopefully that illustrates what's happening.
So we need to fix that and a common pattern to solve that is to use a default value of None.
So we're going to redefine our log function so the same way as before but instead of setting de-th to
the function call we're going to set it to none.
And then inside the function we're going to test if it's still none.
Now in this case here when I actually specified the date and time while this will not be numb anymore.
So basically if as a caller I pass in the arguments value then that means that Dipti won't be none.
So that's all I need to test for.
Right.
So I would say if DTA is none then D.T. is equal to I could say you know if BT is non-selling ditties
falsie that I could set the date time that UTC now.
OK.
So that would work.
And let's go ahead and then print whatever we were printing before I'm just going to copy paste it.
And so now if we call log in message 1 and if we pass in a date then it will work as before.
I'll just pass it this way.
Sorry of course it's a key word only argument.
OK.
So they would
Sorry if not the team right.
If D.T. is faulty we want to set the default date and time.
So there we go.
Right.
And now if we call log in without specifying DTC I can type.
Then we get you know the default the current time.
Now because he has none.
I didn't specify it what I call the function.
So DD is done took on as default value so therefore it's going to go ahead and run this.
And if I run it again from talking a little bit there we go right.
We've had a change in the time stamp so that that's working as we expected.
Now there is a better way or maybe not a better way but certainly a more concise way of doing this.
And that's by using the fact that the or Boolean OR operator works in the sense that if A or B if A's
truth return.
Otherwise we turn B.
So we're just going to say DTC putting or dates time that UTC now and this way.
Right.
So if DTA is none it's going to be falsie.
So if it's falsie it's then going to return be it's truthy which means I specified a value it's not
none.
Then it will do that.
Now this means by the way that if in either case it would have worked the same way if I was to do this.
Lagi on message 3 and I do specify ditty but I may be able to none.
For example.
Right.
It's still going to work correctly it's not going to say Yeah OK.
You didn't specify something other than none in here.
So that's one way of fixing the problem also want to very quickly talk about the other thing I was talking
about in the lecture which is let's say we have a function let's say def let's call it fun.
That takes in let's say value.
And I'm going to make it equal to a list.
But what I'm going to do is I'm going to create my list equals one comic to come three.
And here I'm going to make the default be my list and then I'll just print a k.
So now if I call func while it's just going to print my list because that's the default Farkle func
with a different list.
Let's say a and b then it's going to print a and b.
But now look at what's happens.
Let's say I do my list d'arte attend and let's say I penned a value to it.
OK for now my list is what my list is one two three four.
And if I call func What do I get while I get one two three four.
Right.
So this is now the opposite problem where let's say here I expected that a diff will always default
to 1 to 3 but something went ahead and changed that list right because my list is just a pointer right.
It's a reference to wherever this object lives in memory.
So when I change that object in memory because it's a mutable object then I have this problem.
So if you want to make sure that it doesn't happen then what you really would prefer to do is use a
tuple then you know that that can change right because you can't append to a taco.
So now when I call my list it's 1 2 3 and the function will still default to 1 to 3.
So again just be aware of those problems that you can have with default values.
Basically it's just the fact that when Python encounters this right this line of code here is fully
evaluated and it's kind of set but it's also set in a way that it references objects for the defaults.
So if you're referencing a mutable object you can have a problem if you are instead calling a function
that you expect to change over time as we did right in the beginning.
Then again you can run into issues and this is actually a fairly common error right.
That's easy to make.
So don't fall into that trap.
All right.
I think that's it.
That's all I have to say for default values and some of the caveats associated with them.
So thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next video.